.\" $Id$
.\" tiffcrop -- a port of tiffcp.c extended to include cropping of selections
.\"
.\" Original code:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1988-1997 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991-1997 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" Richard Nolde Updated 3/2007 Add support for the options below to extract 
.\" sections of image(s) and to modify the whole image or selected portion
.\" with rotations, mirroring, and colorscale/colormap inversion of selected
.\" types of TIFF images when appropriate
.\"
.\" Options: 
.\" -U units    [in, cm, px ] inches, centimeters or pixels
.\" -H #         set horizontal resolution of output images to #
.\" -V #         set vertical resolution of output images to #
.\" -J #         set horizontal margin of output page to # expressed in current units
.\" -K #         set vertical margin of output page to # expressed in current units
.\" -X #         horizontal dimension of region to extract expressed in current units
.\" -Y #         vertical dimension of region to extract expressed in current units
.\" -O orient    orientation for output image, portrait, landscape, auto
.\" -P page      page size for output image segments, eg letter, legal, tabloid, etc.
.\" -S cols:rows divide the image into equal sized segments using cols across and rows down
.\" -X #        horizontal dimension of region to extract expressed in current units
.\" -Y #        vertical dimension of region to extract expressed in current units
.\" -E t|l|r|b  edge to use as origin
.\" -m #,#,#,#  margins from edges for selection: top, left, bottom, right (comma separated)
.\" -Z #:#,#:#  up to 32 zones of the image designated as zone X of Y, 
.\"             eg 1:3 would be first of three equal portions measured from reference edge
.\" -N odd|even|#,#-#,#|last         sequences and ranges of images within file to process
.\"             the words odd or even may be used to specify all odd or even numbered images
.\"             the word last may be used in place of a number in the sequence to indicate 
.\"             the final image in the file without knowing how many images there are
.\" -R #        rotate image or crop selection by 90,180,or 270 degrees clockwise  
.\" -F h|v      flip (mirror) image or crop selection horizontally or vertically 
.\" -I          invert the colormap, black to white, for bilevel and grayscale images
.\"
.if n .po 0
.TH TIFFCROP 1 "April 06, 2007" "libtiff"
.SH NAME
tiffcrop \- copy, convert, crop, extract, or process a
.SM TIFF
file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tiffcrop
[
.I options
]
.I "src1.tif ... srcN.tif dst.tif"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I tiffcrop
combines one or more files created according
to the Tag Image File Format, Revision 6.0
into a single
.SM TIFF
file.
The output file may be compressed using a different
algorithm than the input files.
.I tiffcrop
is most often used to extract portions of an image for processing 
with bar code recognizer or OCR software when that software cannot 
restrict the region of interest to a specific portion of the image 
or to improve efficiency when the regions of interest must be rotated.
It can also be used to subdivide all or part of a processed image into 
smaller sections.
.PP
Functions are applied to the input image in the following order:
.RS
.nf
cropping, fixed area extraction, zones, inversion, mirroring, rotation.
.fi
.RE
.TP
Functions are applied to the output image in the following order:
.RS
output resolution, output margins, rows and columns 
.B or
page size divisions, orientation options, strip, tile, byte order, 
and compression options.
.fi
.RE
.PP
By default, 
.I tiffcrop
will copy all the understood tags in a
.SM TIFF
directory of an input file to the associated directory in the output file.
Options can be used to force the resultant image to be written as strips 
or tiles of data, respectively.
.PP
.I tiffcrop
can be used to reorganize the storage characteristics of data
in a file, and to reorganize, extract, rotate, and otherwise
process the image data as specified at the same time whereas 
tiffcp does not alter the image data itself. 
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-N odd|even|#,#-#,#|last
Specify one or more series or range(s) of images within file to process.
The words
.B odd
or
.B even
may be used to specify all odd or even numbered images. The word
.B last 
may be used in place of a number in the sequence to indicate the 
final image in the file without knowing how many images there are.
Ranges of images may be specified with a dash and multiple sets
can be indicated by joining them in a comma-separated list. eg. use
.B \-N 1,5-7,last 
to process the 1st, 5th through 7th, and final image in the file.
.TP
.B \-E top|bottom|left|right
Specify the top, bottom, left, or right edge as the reference from
which to calcuate the width and length of crop regions or sequence
of postions for zones. May be abbreviated to first letter.
.TP
.B \-U in|cm|px
Specify the type of units to apply to dimensions for margins and 
crop regions for input and output images. Inches or centimeters 
are converted to pixels using the resolution unit specified in the 
TIFF file (which defaults to inches if not specified in the IFD).
.TP
.B \-m #,#,#,#
Specify margins to be removed from the input image. The order must 
be top, left, bottom, right with only commas separating the elements 
of the list. Margins are scaled according to the current units and 
removed before any other extractions are computed. Captial M was in use.
.TP
.B \-X #
Set the horizontal (X-axis) dimension of a region to extract relative to 
the specified origin reference. If the origin is the top or bottom
edge, the X axis value will be assumed to start at the left edge.
.TP
.B \-Y #
Set the vertical (Y-axis) dimension of a region to extract relative to
the specified origin reference. If the origin is the left or right
edge, the Y axis value will be assumed to start at the top.
.TP
.B \-Z  #:#,#:#  
Specify zones of the image designated as position X of Y equal sized portions
measured from the reference edge,  eg 1:3 would be first third of the
image starting from the reference edge minus any margins specified
for the confining edges. Multiple zones can be specified as a comma
separated list but they must reference the same edge. To extract the
top quarter and the bottom third of an image you would use 
.B \-Z 1:4,3:3.
.TP
.B \-F horiz|vert
Flip, ie mirror, the image or extracted region horizontally or vertically.
.TP
.B \-R 90|180|270
Rotate the image or extracted region 90, 180, or 270 degrees clockwise.
.TP
.B \-I
Invert the colorspace values for grayscale and bilevel images. This 
would be used to correct negative images that have incorrect PHOTMETRIC
INTERPRETATION tags. No support for color images.
.TP
.B \-H #
Set the horizontal resolution of output images to #
expressed in the current units.
.TP
.B \-V #
Set the vertical resolution of the output images to #
expressed in the current units.
.TP
.B \-J #
Set the horizontal margin of an output page size to #
expressed in the current units.
.TP
.B \-K #
Set the vertical margin of an output page size to # 
expressed in the current units.
.TP
.B \-O portrait|landscape|auto
Set the output orientation of the pages or sections.
Auto will use the arrangement that requires the fewest pages.
.TP
.B \-S cols:rows
Divide each image into cols across and rows down equal sections.
.TP
.B \-P page
Format the output images to fit on page size paper. Use
-P list to show the supported page sizes and dimensions.
.TP
.B \-B
Force output to be written with Big-Endian byte order.
This option only has an effect when the output file is created or
overwritten and not when it is appended to.
.TP
.B \-C
Suppress the use of ``strip chopping'' when reading images
that have a single strip/tile of uncompressed data.
.TP
.B \-c
Specify the compression to use for data written to the output file:
.B none 
for no compression,
.B packbits
for PackBits compression,
.B lzw
for Lempel-Ziv & Welch compression,
.B jpeg
for baseline JPEG compression,
.B zip
for Deflate compression,
.B g3
for CCITT Group 3 (T.4) compression,
and
.B g4
for CCITT Group 4 (T.6) compression.
By default
.I tiffcrop
will compress data according to the value of the
.I Compression
tag found in the source file.
.IP
The
.SM CCITT
Group 3 and Group 4 compression algorithms can only
be used with bilevel data.
.IP
Group 3 compression can be specified together with several
T.4-specific options:
.B 1d
for 1-dimensional encoding,
.B 2d
for 2-dimensional encoding,
and
.B fill
to force each encoded scanline to be zero-filled so that the
terminating EOL code lies on a byte boundary.
Group 3-specific options are specified by appending a ``:''-separated
list to the ``g3'' option; e.g.
.B "\-c g3:2d:fill"
to get 2D-encoded data with byte-aligned EOL codes.
.IP
.SM LZW
compression can be specified together with a 
.I predictor
value.
A predictor value of 2 causes
each scanline of the output image to undergo horizontal
differencing before it is encoded; a value
of 1 forces each scanline to be encoded without differencing.
LZW-specific options are specified by appending a ``:''-separated
list to the ``lzw'' option; e.g.
.B "\-c lzw:2"
for
.SM LZW
compression with horizontal differencing.
.TP
.B \-f
Specify the bit fill order to use in writing output data.
By default,
.I tiffcrop
will create a new file with the same fill order as the original.
Specifying
.B "\-f lsb2msb"
will force data to be written with the FillOrder tag set to
.SM LSB2MSB,
while
.B "\-f msb2lsb"
will force data to be written with the FillOrder tag set to
.SM MSB2LSB.
.TP
.B \-i
Ignore non-fatal read errors and continue processing of the input file.
.TP
.B \-l
Specify the length of a tile (in pixels).
.I tiffcrop
attempts to set the tile dimensions so
that no more than 8 kilobytes of data appear in a tile.
.TP
.B \-L
Force output to be written with Little-Endian byte order.
This option only has an effect when the output file is created or
overwritten and not when it is appended to.
.TP
.B \-M
Suppress the use of memory-mapped files when reading images.
.TP
.B \-p
Specify the planar configuration to use in writing image data
that has more than one 8-bit sample per pixel.
By default,
.I tiffcrop
will create a new file with the same planar configuration as
the original.
Specifying
.B "\-p contig"
will force data to be written with multi-sample data packed
together, while
.B "\-p separate"
will force samples to be written in separate planes.
.TP
.B \-r
Specify the number of rows (scanlines) in each strip of data
written to the output file.
By default (or when value
.B 0
is specified),
.I tiffcrop
attempts to set the rows/strip that no more than 8 kilobytes of 
data appear in a strip. If you specify the special value
.B -1
it will results in infinite number of the rows per strip. The entire image
will be the one strip in that case.
.TP
.B \-s
Force the output file to be written with data organized in strips
(rather than tiles).
.TP
.B \-t
Force the output file to be written with data organized in tiles
(rather than strips).
.TP
.B \-w
Specify the width of a tile (in pixels).
.I tiffcrop
attempts to set the tile dimensions so
that no more than 8 kilobytes of data appear in a tile.
.I tiffcrop
attempts to set the tile dimensions so
that no more than 8 kilobytes of data appear in a tile.
.TP
.B \-,={character}
substitute {character} for ',' in parsing image directory indices
in files.  This is necessary if filenames contain commas.
Note that ',=' with whitespace immediately following will disable
the special meaning of the ',' entirely.  See examples.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following concatenates two files and writes the result using 
.SM LZW
encoding:
.RS
.nf
tiffcrop -c lzw a.tif b.tif result.tif
.fi
.RE
.PP
To convert a G3 1d-encoded 
.SM TIFF
to a single strip of G4-encoded data the following might be used:
.RS
.nf
tiffcrop -c g4 -r 10000 g3.tif g4.tif
.fi
.RE
(1000 is just a number that is larger than the number of rows in
the source file.)

To extract a selected set of images from a multi-image TIFF file 
use the -N option described above. Thus, to copy the 1st and 3rd
images of image file "album.tif" to "result.tif":
.RS
.nf
tiffcrop -N 1,3 album.tif result.tif
.fi
.RE
.PP
Invert a bilevel image scan of a microfilmed document and crop off margins of
0.25 inches on the left and right, 0.5 inch on the top, nad 0.75 inch on the
bottom. From the remaining portion of the image, select the second and third
quarters, ie, one half of the area left from the center to each margin. 
.RS
.nf
tiffcrop -U in -m 0.5,0.25,0.75,0.25 -E left -Z 2:4,3:4 -I MicrofilmNegative.tif MicrofilmPostiveCenter.tif
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract only the final image of a large Architectural E sized 
multipage TIFF file and rotate it 90 degrees clockwise while 
reformatting the output to fit on tabloid sized sheets with one 
quarter of an inch on each side:
.RS
.nf
tiffcrop -N last -R 90 -O auto -P tabloid -U in -J 0.25 -K 0.25 -H 300 -V 300 Big-PlatMap.tif BigPlatMap-Tabloid.tif 
.fi
.RE
The output images will have a specified resolution of 300 dpi in both
directions. The orientation of each page will be determined by whichever
choice requires the fewest pages. To specify a specific orientation, use
the portrait or landscape option.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pal2rgb (1),
.BR tiffinfo (1),
.BR tiffcmp (1),
.BR tiffcp (1),
.BR tiffmedian (1),
.BR tiffsplit (1),
.BR libtiff (3TIFF)
.PP
Libtiff library home page:
.BR http://www.remotesensing.org/libtiff/

